ADAPTED FROM THE NOVEL ZHU YU
BY TUAN ZI LAI XI ON JJWXC.NET
Careful!
Changyu.
I can explain.
You lied to me.
You lied to me in Lin'an.
You lied to me in the camp.
You have been lying all along.
Was that injury fake too?
Are you hurt?
Do not touch me.
What you just said,
I can explain all of it.
You need treatment. Let's go back.
I am just a butcher's daughter.
How could I trouble
the exalted Marquis Wu'an?
I am not allowed to care?
Then why drug me and run to war?
Do you know what a battlefield is?
It is where lives
are worth less than dirt!
Did you forget what I told you
after the sheep and salt incident?
So you were deceiving me back then too,
weren't you?
Marquis Wu'an, is it fun deceiving people?
I went to war
because you deceived me.
I drugged you
because I was afraid you would die there.
I can die.
But you must live well.
If I fall,
take Fan Changning
and settle somewhere quiet.
Open a braised meat shop.
Raise pigs if you like.
As long as you live,
you may live however you wish.
Find yourself a gentle scholar,
have children.
I will not interfere.
But as long as I live,
in this lifetime,
you are mine.
Madam, your man Man Di is gravely injured.
-Where is he?
-Jin Yuanbao took him back to camp.
Madam, your headscarf.
Marquis.
The strategist is injured!
Wake up.
You have been with us
since you were barely ten.
If you leave without a word,
how am I supposed
to answer to your sister?
What happened to Man Di?
He was stabbed clean through the chest.
Blood would not stop.
The lady physician came earlier.
She shook her head
and left without a word.
How could this happen?
When we were clearing the field,
a young soldier suddenly leapt up
from a pile of corpses.
-Man Di!
Was he
the boy guarding the catapult?
Yes, that one.
I should not have hesitated.
If I had killed him then,
Man Di would not be lying here now.
We told you not to crowd around.
What is going on?
Lady Doctor, please save him.
He is fine. It is not fatal.
Not fatal?
You told me he was stabbed
through the chest.
The blade pierced his breastplate.
Thankfully, it blocked the blow.
No organs were harmed.
That breastplate…
Man Di's sister asked me
to give it to him.
All you grown men
covered your eyes
when I cleaned the wound,
too squeamish to look.
Now you are frightening yourselves.
Look at his face.
His… lips. Even a corpse
would not look that pale.
He was frightened badly.
His body is weak to begin with.
That is why I told you not to crowd him.
Let him rest properly.
Man Di is fine.
I have others to tend to.
Thank you.
That is a relief.
He is fine, Yuanbao.
As long as he is fine.
Pull it out.
Report! General Shi Hu was slain
by an enemy woman soldier
with a butcher's knife.
What did you say?
Shi Hu was slain by a woman soldier.
My brother…
Impossible.
My brother could fight off 10,000 men.
General Shi Hu could fight off 10,000 men!
I saw it with my own eyes.
He was disarmed of his golden hammer.
Three blows. No.
Two blows and he was finished.
I said that is impossible.
-Go verify it again!
-Yes.
No.
That must have been Fan Changyu.
Fan Changyu…
Report! The Yanzhou and Jizhou armies
are advancing from the southwest.
They're closing in.
Our army is now attacked on three sides.
Prepare to depart.
My father awaits us in Lucheng.
Your Highness…
I said retreat.
Your Highness is right.
Prince Changxin's great cause
cannot be delayed.
Retreat!
I fought with everything I had
trying to stop him.
Still, I failed.
Shi Yue took Sui Yuanqing.
And I ended up wounded.
A scholar truly has no place
on the battlefield.
I told you to wear armor,
and you would not.
Had to copy Kongming instead.
Not even close.
Xie Jiu.
Go to the Yanzhou camp
and fetch Doctor Lu.
-Yes.
-Wait.
This little scratch of mine
hardly calls for a military physician.
No need for a cannon to kill a fly.
So the injury is not serious?
Fine.
Go fetch the veterinarian.
-Yes.
-Wait.
There is not another physician
anywhere in this camp?
Then perhaps
I should invite the Grand Princess
to examine you.
Go tell Her Highness
my injuries are grave.
My life hangs by a thread.
But you do not look that bad.
Of course, you cannot see it
from the outside.
Inside, I am already rotten.
Understood.
I have matters to attend to.
I'll head out.
I hear your wounds
are beyond saving, Mr. Gongsun.
So I came to chant a few sutras
for your passing.
Om mani padme hum.
-Om mani padme hum.
-Stop that.
Another chant and you will
really send me off.
Mr. Gongsun,
you must have endured
much hardship along the way.
None at all.
The Marquis bears the burden of the realm.
I admire him deeply.
Following him through hardship
is my own choice.
Nothing bitter about it.
In the clash with the Chongzhou army,
the Marquis escaped danger in the end.
There is no need to worry about him.
I am not worried
about that rascal of a disciple.
Half a month ago,
among the Jizhou soldiers
delivering grain up the mountain
was half a disciple of mine.
She went up with the convoy
and never came back down.
I have no idea what has become of her.
A grain courier?
Yes.
And your disciple?
But from what I know,
you are extremely selective
about disciples.
Across the whole of Dayin,
only Xie Zheng ever met your standards.
So how did some random soldier on the road
earn your favor?
And only half of it at that?
That girl has exceptional bones.
A rare prodigy for martial arts.
Only her wit falls a bit short.
She hates reading.
So I count her
as half a disciple.
A girl…
Your Highness, slow down!
Careful!
Your Highness, are you all right?
Your Highness, this is hardly proper.
Xie Jiu said he was dying.
-What propriety matters now?
-Wait for me!
Grand Tutor,
the disciple you mentioned,
is her surname Fan?
Indeed it is. Fan Changyu.
Nineteen years old.
Why do you ask? Do you know her?
-So my troublesome disciple knows her too?
-Gongsun!
This is the man Xie Jiu said
was at death's door?
Almost there.
Already rotting on the inside.
Your Highness the Grand Princess.
My respects.
Your Highness!
If you will excuse me. Your Highness!
Your Highness, please let me explain.
Your Highness!
Careful, Your Highness.
Please hear me out.
Your Highness, please.
Why would you toy with me like this?
I was not toying with you. I…
Forgive me.
I…
I simply did not expect
Your Highness to rush here
in such concern for me.
So I…
Don't take them off.
Too late.
It was my fault.
I only remembered
how Your Highness encouraged me
before the campaign.
Headmaster.
What I said this morning
was merely to encourage the soldiers.
Don't read too much into it.
You seem perfectly well.
There are other wounded soldiers
who need my care.
I will take my leave.
-Your Highness, does it hurt?
-Yes. But I can bear it.
Mrs. Fan.
The kitchen made ginger broth.
I brought you a bowl.
No need, General Xie Jiu.
Give it to someone else.
Is there anything else?
When I hid the truth from you,
it was not by choice.
I had been framed.
I was hunted down
and ended up stranded in Lin'an.
By chance, you saved me from the snow.
If I had told you who I was then,
it might have brought danger upon you.
So I chose to keep it hidden.
I never blamed you
for hiding it back then.
Then you resent me
for hiding it this time?
When you came looking for me,
I was truly happy.
But I also knew
that once you learned the truth,
you'd be more frustrated.
So all those explanations
never made it past my lips.
Ning was taken
because of my identity.
For that, I owe you an apology.
I do not blame you
for Ning being taken.
You were wounded trying to save her.
When you deceived me on the mountain…
I do not blame you for that either.
You blame me for nothing.
So what you are saying is that we should
simply part ways?
We were never truly together.
What parting is there to speak of?
What did you just say?
What do you mean we were never together?
What are you trying to say?
We had an agreement.
You would marry into my family
in name only.
But there was never
anyone called Yan Zheng.
If Yan Zheng never existed,
then that marriage contract
never existed either.
Then why did you come looking for me?
Why promise to support me
by working as a butcher?
Why take it upon yourself
to go to war in my place?
I came looking for Yan Zheng.
-Not Xie Zheng.
-What difference does that make?
-They are both me.
-It is different.
I cannot see you…
see Marquis Wu'an as Yan Zheng.
Marquis Wu'an is a hero of the realm.
Born to a great house.
If he were with a butcher girl,
the whole world would laugh.
I know my place well enough.
Whom I marry is my decision.
What concern is it of the world?
You are not merely a butcher girl.
You are a heroine of great merit.
If you truly fear the world's ridicule,
then fine.
I'll ask His Majesty
to grant our marriage.
We can be together openly.
Who would dare mock us then?
Changyu.
My name is Xie Zheng.
Courtesy name Jiuheng.
Born to a military family.
A man from the capital.
Enfeoffed as Marquis Wu'an.
With a sincere heart,
I ask for your hand in marriage.
May we live in peace
and grow old together.
I see.
Teacher.
What brings you here?
That injury of yours is rather peculiar.
It does not look like something
you got in battle.
More like one from a brawl.
Do not tell me you were beaten by…
In this battle, Prince Changxin lost
one of his fiercest generals, Shi Hu.
Yet Shi Yue managed a surprise strike
and rescued Sui Yuanqing.
That was a failure in my planning.
The Shi brothers were Prince Changxin's
two strongest commanders.
Now that Shi Hu is dead,
he has effectively lost an arm.
I heard that by the time you arrived
to receive the Yanzhou reinforcements,
Shi Hu was already dead.
Who in your army
could possibly defeat such a man?
His wife killed him.
Wife? Whose wife?
His wife? You are married?
Did you not swear you would never marry?
And yet you never even told me?
It is a long story.
Let's call it a marriage born of hardship.
Hardship?
I will not ask you.
You tell me.
How did that woman kill Shi Hu?
At the time, we were badly outnumbered.
The Marchioness snatched
Shi Hu's war hammer
-and struck him three times, ending his--
-What?
Three blows killed Shi Hu?
Then she must come
from a line of famous generals.
-No.
-No?
Then she must be an extraordinary woman.
Jiuheng,
you must treat her well.
Shi Hu is dead.
Shi Yue will not let this pass.
And Prince Changxin
has his sights firmly set on Lucheng.
How do you plan to deal with this?
If I commit the Xie army
and join forces with He Jingyuan
to crush Prince Changxin,
someone else will be waiting
to reap the spoils.
Right now,
Wei Yan is trying to cover up
Wei Xuan's grave mistake in the northwest.
The best move for him
is to seize the credit
for crushing the Chongzhou rebels.
In my view,
letting him take that credit
may not be a bad thing.
Why do you say that, Grand Tutor?
Tell me. Who else in Dayin
was granted a marquisate
before turning 20?
The higher you climb, the harder you fall.
Even if you defeat the rebels
and return to the capital
with great merit,
what more could His Majesty
possibly reward you with?
The court is treacherous these days.
Better to temper your brilliance
and watch others
fight each other to the death.
You mean,
let the Li clan and Wei Yan
fight it out first,
while we wait to reap the benefit?
Wei Yan holds the military command.
He Jingyuan guards Jizhou for him.
For years,
Li Xing has not dared
confront Wei Yan directly.
Otherwise, he would never have sent
his beloved eldest grandson, Li Huai'an,
to the northwest to serve in the army.
Then, by that reasoning,
Prince Changxin's rebellion
could be a scheme for the Li clan
on the military power?
The Li clan may scheme,
but not to that extent.
However, Prince Changxin's
eldest son, Sui Yuanhuai,
has long been rumored
to have secret dealings with the Li clan.
No smoke without fire.
It is very suspicious.
Sui Yuanhuai…
That reminds me of something.
After Crown Prince Chengde
and Xie Linshan fell in battle at Jinzhou,
the late emperor suddenly abdicated
and passed the throne
to the current emperor, Qi Sheng.
Soon after, a great fire
broke out in the Eastern Palace.
The crown princess and her son
perished in the flames.
At the time, Princess Changxin was
at the Eastern Palace with her eldest son.
The boy was burned so badly,
his face could no longer be shown.
Yet the late emperor
offered no compensation.
Prince Changxin has kept
a low profile for years.
His resentment toward the court
is beyond doubt.
Once down the mountain,
send word to the capital.
Investigate the Eastern Palace fire
in secret.
Prince Changxin's eldest son,
Sui Yuanhuai,
has a trusted aide named Zhao Xun.
A seal from the Eastern Palace
is in his possession.
Sixteen years ago,
when the Eastern Palace burned,
I was among the few who survived.
Yet now,
Sui Yuanhuai has issued
an order to capture him.
We must find Zhao Xun
before he does.
Just now, in Mr. Gongsun's tent,
it was not appropriate for me
to pry into your personal affairs.
But now I will ask you plainly.
This marriage of yours,
did you take a proper wife
or merely a concubine?
A proper wife, of course.
If it is a legitimate marriage,
why do you look so glum?
I hid my identity from her.
Now that she knows
she would be marrying Marquis Wu'an,
she refuses.
She says
she never needed military merit
to stand beside me.
A clear-minded woman.
Very much like the young disciple
I recently took in at Baxia.
Even if you offered to trade
her husband for Marquis Wu'an,
she would still refuse.
My wife is much the same.
Titles and riches mean nothing to her.
They are not worth
as much as a bowl of rice.
Give her a few roast chickens
and she would be happier than an immortal.
She works without ever complaining,
with strength that never seems to run out.
Laughing and smiling all day long.
Why do I feel
they are talking about the same person?
Sir.
I have a request.
Speak.
I ask that you accept my wife
as your adopted daughter.
So you wish to give her
a respectable family to stand behind her,
to silence the gossip of others.
Yes.
I do not care about her origins.
But I will not allow people
to use them to slander her.
And what if the girl refuses?
What if she only wishes
to live as an ordinary commoner?
I will respect her choice.
But if she chooses to stay with me,
I will never let her suffer again.
I did not expect
such devotion from you.
Just like your mother.
Very well.
I agree.
Your new wife, what is her name?
How old is she?
Her surname is Fan. Her name is Changyu.
She is 19.
Your… Your wife?
Your female disciple?
You married into her family?
You were taken to repair the dam?
You…
Marquis--
What is it?
It's already near midnight.
You should rest.
How is Xie Wu's injury?
The physician says
his organs are unharmed.
He only needs rest.
Good.
Bring me my horse.
-Marquis… This…
-Do it.
Yes.
‎XIE
The Marquis ordered you
to stand guard here?
Yes.
I will not leave the camp.
Please help keep an eye on Ning for me.
Of course.
Who is there? Come out!
It is me.
What are you doing here?
Could not sleep.
Came out to clear my head.
You cannot sleep either?
I saw too many bodies on the battlefield.
It is weighing on my chest.
The first time I went to war,
I could not sleep either.
I had nightmares all night.
The second time I went to battle,
I killed even more men than the first.
That whole night,
I could not sleep at all.
So I went to the river
and started fishing.
Fished the entire night.
Until I was completely worn out.
That night, I fell asleep right away.
After that,
the nightmares stopped.
It is all behind you now.
If you are still feeling restless,
we can spar a little.
What is it? Afraid?
Come on.
What was that?
Repaying kindness with a blow?
In war, deception is fair play.
That is a convincing argument.
You were not fighting seriously.
On the battlefield,
I would never beat you.
Close combat favors speed.
You wield short blades well,
but rely too much on brute force.
Use less force. Follow the momentum.
Use more finesse.
Increase your speed.
-Again.
-Come.
Just now, you were holding back.
I am not a fool.
I had to test your moves first.
Again.
This one is ready. Careful, it is hot.
This is delicious. Sweet and sour.
Did you bring seasoning?
No.
I picked some wild berries.
Some are sour, some a little spicy.
So you tasted them all first?
Why? Does it taste bad?
Do not treat me so well.
You are Marquis Wu'an.
I am just a butcher woman.
You are the best woman
I could ever ask for.
I like you.
Well, don't.
You should marry someone
of equal standing.
Live a glorious life,
admired by thousands.
Admired by thousands…
Everything I have today
I earned with military merit.
Not admiration.
If I, Marquis Wu'an,
have to worry
about what the world thinks
of my marriage,
that would be truly pitiful.
Before this,
I never even considered marriage.
My uncle lives without affection.
My mother loved too deeply.
Neither life was what I wanted.
I was born on the battlefield
and expected to die there.
I believed
I was destined to fall in battle.
So,
I never wanted a woman
to spend her life mourning me.
But after meeting you,
I suddenly found
I am a little afraid to die.
Enough about me.
Tell me about you.
After we're through with this war,
what do you want to do?
Raise and slaughter pigs?
The future is too far away.
I can only think
about what is in front of me.
I promised Ning
I would find Qian and Bao'er.
And Mr. Zhao.
And Jin Yuanbao and his men.
And all the townfolks
scattered in foreign lands.
I want to bring them home.
Lin'an may have been destroyed,
but we can rebuild it
with our own hands, brick by brick.
Good.
When all this is over,
I'll request a post in the northwest.
Then,
everything in the capital
will have nothing to do with me.
When the time comes,
I will rebuild Lin'an with you.
What do you think?
You would really…
stay in Lin'an?
The days I spent in Lin'an with you
were the happiest days
of my life.
Zheng! Mrs. Zhao says come eat lunch!
Every morning, I woke up to the sound
of you slaughtering pigs.
Then Ning, Mr. Zhao, and I
would play chess.
Build snowmen together.
At noon,
I could eat your pork intestine noodles.
And listen to Mrs. Zhao
gossip about the village.
Thirty taels!
Look who is here!
At night, we would sit together,
studying calligraphy together
to the sound of crickets.
All of it.
I miss every bit of it.
You hold my hand so tight.
Aren't you afraid you'll make
your hand bleed again?
I am more afraid you will hit me.
That is because you keep kissing me
out of nowhere.
Fists down,
and I won't kiss you out of nowhere.
Try it.
NO ANIMALS WERE HARMED
IN THE MAKING OF THIS EPISODE
Subtitle translation by: Jiaxin Wang